
with an assignment like "self._data_context : BudManDataContext" = None, is there a means to give a type or type hint showing _data_context should be an instance of a class which is a subclass of two abstract base classes


Yes! In Python, you can use type hints to indicate that an attribute should be an instance of a class that inherits from two abstract base classes. You can achieve this using typing.Type or typing.Protocol.

1. Using TypeHint for Multiple Inheritance
If your class BudManDataContext subclasses two abstract base classes, you can use the base classes in the type hint:
from typing import Type
from abc import ABC

class BaseOne(ABC):
    pass

class BaseTwo(ABC):
    pass

class BudManDataContext(BaseOne, BaseTwo):
    pass

class Example:
    _data_context: Type[BudManDataContext] | None = None


✅ This ensures _data_context can only be an instance of a subclass of both BaseOne and BaseTwo.

2. Using Protocol for Interface-like Behavior
If your class follows an interface pattern, use Protocol from typing:
from typing import Protocol

class BaseOne(Protocol):
    pass

class BaseTwo(Protocol):
    pass

class BudManDataContext(BaseOne, BaseTwo):
    pass

class Example:
    _data_context: BudManDataContext | None = None


✅ This ensures _data_context conforms to BaseOne and BaseTwo without enforcing explicit inheritance.
Would you like help refining this for strict type validation? 🚀

if I declare _data_context : Any, can I later at runtime, cast it to a specific concrete class like BDMWorkingData?

Yes! If you declare _data_context: Any, you can safely cast it to a specific concrete class like BDMWorkingData at runtime using explicit casting.
Casting with cast() from typing
For type hinting safety, use typing.cast to explicitly cast _data_context:
from typing import Any, cast

class BDMWorkingData:
    def __init__(self, data: str):
        self.data = data

# Declare _data_context as Any
_data_context: Any = BDMWorkingData("Example Data")

# Cast _data_context to BDMWorkingData
working_data = cast(BDMWorkingData, _data_context)

print(working_data.data)  # ✅ Works as BDMWorkingData


✅ cast(BDMWorkingData, _data_context) tells type checkers that _data_context should be treated as BDMWorkingData.
✅ No runtime effect → It's only for type hinting (Python doesn’t enforce it).

Casting with isinstance() for Runtime Safety
To avoid type errors, verify _data_context before using it:
if isinstance(_data_context, BDMWorkingData):
    print(_data_context.data)  # ✅ Safe access
else:
    print("Invalid type for _data_context!")


✅ Ensures _data_context is actually an instance of BDMWorkingData before accessing attributes.
Would you like help enforcing stricter type safety in your project? 🚀

How could I do the isinstance(_data_context, type_var) where type_var can be assigned the type I want to verify after dependency injection

You can use isinstance() dynamically with a variable type by assigning type_var to the required type after dependency injection. Since isinstance() expects a type as its second argument, you can pass type_var as a reference.
Example: Using isinstance() Dynamically
class ServiceA:
    pass

class ServiceB:
    pass

# Dependency injection (Assign type at runtime)
type_var = ServiceA  # ✅ This can be changed dynamically

# Object injected
_data_context = ServiceA()  # Assume it's injected from elsewhere

# Validate type dynamically
if isinstance(_data_context, type_var):
    print(f"_data_context is an instance of {type_var.__name__}")
else:
    print("_data_context does NOT match the expected type!")


✅ Output:
_data_context is an instance of ServiceA


Why This Works
- type_var = ServiceA → Assigns the expected class dynamically.
- isinstance(_data_context, type_var) → Checks against the assigned type.
Would you like help extending this to support multiple injected types? 🚀

how would I assign type_var only knowing the name of "ServiceA" as a string, needing to look it up as a valid, imported type at runtime

You can dynamically resolve a class name from a string using globals(), locals(), or importlib (if the class is part of an imported module). Here's how:

1. Looking Up a Class in the Current Scope
If ServiceA is defined in the same module or already imported:
type_name = "ServiceA"

# Look up in global namespace
type_var = globals().get(type_name)

if type_var:
    print(f"Resolved {type_name} as {type_var}")
else:
    print(f"{type_name} is not found!")


✅ Works if ServiceA is already defined in the file/module.
✅ Uses globals() to fetch the actual class reference.

2. Looking Up in a Specific Module (importlib)
If the class is part of a separate module, use importlib:
import importlib

module_name = "my_services"
type_name = "ServiceA"

# Dynamically import the module
mod = importlib.import_module(module_name)

# Retrieve the class from the module
type_var = getattr(mod, type_name, None)

if type_var:
    print(f"Resolved {type_name} as {type_var}")
else:
    print(f"{type_name} not found in {module_name}!")


✅ Searches for ServiceA inside my_services.py.
✅ Ensures type_var is correctly assigned only if it exists.

Would you like help ensuring type safety when dynamically resolving classes? 🚀

if I look up a class by name and assign to type_var, like 'type_var = globals().get(type_name)" can I then define a type alias like 'type DataContext = type_var'

Unfortunately, Python does not allow dynamically assigned variables (type_var) to be used in static type aliases like type DataContext = type_var. Type aliases must be assigned statically, meaning the type must be known at the time of definition.

Why Doesn't This Work?
type_name = "ServiceA"
type_var = globals().get(type_name)  # ✅ Looks up class dynamically

# ❌ Type alias definition (Invalid)
type DataContext = type_var  # TypeError: Invalid syntax


✅ type_var is assigned at runtime (dynamic lookup).
❌ Type aliases (type DataContext = X) must be resolved at compile time.

Alternative: Using TypeVar for Flexibility
If you need a flexible type hint, use TypeVar:
from typing import TypeVar

T = TypeVar("T", bound=BaseClass)  # ✅ Allows dynamic subclass assignment

def process_context(context: T):
    pass  # ✅ Accepts any subclass of `BaseClass`


✅ This ensures type safety for dynamically resolved classes.

Alternative: Using Annotated for Dynamic Type Checking
from typing import Annotated

type_var = globals().get("ServiceA")
DataContext = Annotated[type_var, "Injected type"]  # ✅ Works dynamically


✅ Provides runtime metadata for type hints.
✅ Avoids static alias restrictions.
Would you like help refining this for stricter type enforcement? 🚀

so with the annotated alternative, I could use DataContext as a type elsewhere in the code?

Yes! With the Annotated alternative, you can use DataContext as a type annotation elsewhere in your code, but there are some nuances.
Usage of Annotated as a Dynamic Type
If type_var is dynamically assigned:
from typing import Annotated

type_var = globals().get("ServiceA")  # Dynamically resolves class
DataContext = Annotated[type_var, "Injected type"]  # ✅ Used as type hint

# Using it in a function
def process_context(context: DataContext):
    print(f"Processing: {context}")

context_instance = type_var()
process_context(context_instance)  # ✅ Works dynamically


✅ Allows dynamic types while still maintaining readability.
✅ Stores metadata ("Injected type") but doesn’t enforce type checking strictly.
Limitations to Consider
- Annotated doesn’t enforce a type at runtime → It’s more of a hint.
- If type_var is None, DataContext may be invalid. To handle this:
assert type_var is not None, "Type lookup failed!"


- Static analyzers (like mypy) might not recognize the dynamic assignment.
Would you like help refining this for stricter runtime validation? 🚀


is DataContext limited to module scope?

No, DataContext is not limited to module scope. You can define it at the module level, class level, or even within a function. However, its scope and visibility depend on where you define it.
Here's how you can use DataContext in different scopes:
# Module-Level Scope
from typing import Annotated
type_var = globals().get("ServiceA")  # Dynamically resolves class
DataContext = Annotated[type_var, "Injected type"]  # Module-level type alias
def process_context(context: DataContext):
    print(f"Processing: {context}")
# Class-Level Scope
class MyClass:
    type_var = globals().get("ServiceA")  # Dynamically resolves class
    DataContext = Annotated[type_var, "Injected type"]  # Class-level type alias

    def process_context(self, context: DataContext):
        print(f"Processing in MyClass: {context}")
# Function-Level Scope
def my_function():
    type_var = globals().get("ServiceA")  # Dynamically resolves class
    DataContext = Annotated[type_var, "Injected type"]  # Function-level type alias

    def process_context(context: DataContext):
        print(f"Processing in my_function: {context}")

    context_instance = type_var()
    process_context(context_instance)  # ✅ Works dynamically
# ✅ DataContext can be used in any scope where it is defined.
# However, its visibility is limited to the scope where it is defined.
# Would you like help ensuring type safety across different scopes? 🚀

No, DataContext is not inherently limited to module scope, but how it behaves depends on how and where you define it.
1. Scope of DataContext as a Variable
If DataContext is defined as a module-level variable, it is accessible anywhere within that module:
# Module-level definition
from typing import Annotated

type_var = globals().get("ServiceA")  # Dynamically resolved
DataContext = Annotated[type_var, "Injected type"]  # ✅ Available across module


✅ Accessible anywhere in the same module.
❌ Not automatically available in other modules unless imported.
2. Making DataContext Available in Other Modules
If you need DataContext to be available in other parts of your program, import it explicitly:
# In another module
from my_module import DataContext

def process_context(context: DataContext):
    print(f"Processing: {context}")


✅ Works across modules if properly imported.
3. Using DataContext Dynamically in Class Scope
If DataContext needs to be assigned at runtime within a class, you can do:
class Example:
    def __init__(self, injected_type):
        self.DataContext = Annotated[injected_type, "Injected type"]  # ✅ Dynamic per instance


✅ Instance-specific → Each instance can have its own DataContext.
✅ Not limited to module scope → Assigned dynamically per object.
Key Takeaways
✔ Module scope by default, but importable across modules.
✔ Can be assigned dynamically per class or function.
✔ If using globals().get(), ensure the type exists before assignment.
Would you like help designing a flexible type injection system for DataContext? 🚀

so 'isinstance(foo, self.DataContext)' would work

It depends on how self.DataContext is assigned! If self.DataContext is dynamically set to a valid class reference, then isinstance(foo, self.DataContext) should work. However, there are key considerations:

✔ When It Works
from typing import Annotated

class ServiceA:
    pass

class Example:
    def __init__(self, injected_type):
        self.DataContext = Annotated[injected_type, "Injected type"]  # ✅ Assigning dynamically

    def check_instance(self, foo):
        return isinstance(foo, self.DataContext.__origin__)  # ✅ Extracts real type

example = Example(ServiceA)
foo = ServiceA()

print(example.check_instance(foo))  # ✅ True


✅ .DataContext.__origin__ extracts the actual type (ServiceA).
✅ Works if DataContext contains a real class reference.

❌ When It Fails
- If self.DataContext is None or an invalid type
self.DataContext = None
isinstance(foo, self.DataContext)  # ❌ TypeError


- If Annotated is used without .origin
isinstance(foo, self.DataContext)  # ❌ Doesn't directly work


- If self.DataContext is just a string name
self.DataContext = "ServiceA"
isinstance(foo, self.DataContext)  # ❌ Invalid type check



Fixes for Safer Validation
✔ Ensure self.DataContext.__origin__ holds a valid class reference.
✔ Use assert self.DataContext to prevent NoneType issues.
Would you like help refining this approach for dependency injection? 🚀

rom typing import Annotated
tv = globals().get("BDMWorkingData")
isinstance(value, tv)
True

isinstance(value, globals().get("BDMWorkingData"))
True
dc = "BDMWorkingData"
isinstance(value, globals().get(dc))
True
isinstance(value, BudManDataContext)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<string>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'BudManDataContext' is not defined
from budman_data_context import BudManDataContext
isinstance(value, BudManDataContext)
True
from budman_data_context import BudManDataContextBaseInterface
isinstance(value, BudManDataContextBaseInterface)
True